>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 10: A SECRET
C.I.A. ASSESSMENT REVEALS THAT
RUSSIA TRIED TO INFLUENCE THE
U.S. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION IN
FAVOR OF DONALD TRUMP; IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, DIFFERING
OPINIONS ABOUT THE RULES OF WAR;
AND JEFF GREENFIELD EXAMINES
WHAT RONALD REAGAN AND DONALD
TRUMP DO AND DO NOT HAVE IN
COMMON.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WIDESPREAD AND INTENSE REACTION
TODAY TO A "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORT THAT THE C.I.A. IN A
SECRET ASSESSMENT HAS DETERMINED
COVERT RUSSIAN HACKING WAS IN
FACT AN ATTEMPT TO HELP DONALD
TRUMP WIN THE WHITE HOUSE.
A MONTH BEFORE THE PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION, U.S. OFFICIALS SAID
THEY WERE CONFIDENT THAT RUSSIA
WAS BEHIND THE HACKING OF
DEMOCRATIC PARTY EMAILS FOR THE
PURPOSE OF UNDERMINING THE
VOTING PROCESS, BUT IT MAY HAVE
GONE FURTHER THAN THAT.
CITING U.S. OFFICIALS, THE
"POST" SAID INDIVIDUALS
CONNECTED TO THE RUSSIAN
GOVERNMENT GAVE WIKILEAKS HACKED
EMAILS FROM THE DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL COMMITTEE AND THE
CLINTON CAMPAIGN CHAIRMAN.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTED
U.S. INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES HAD
DISCOVERED THE RUSSIANS ALSO
HACKED REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE COMPUTERS BUT KEPT
THAT STOLEN DATA TO THEMSELVES.
THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE COMMUNICATIONS
DIRECTOR, SEAN SPICER, DENIED
THAT TODAY ON CNN.
>> I KNOW THAT WE HAVE WORKED
WITH INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES RIGHT
NOW THAT ARE SAYING THAT WE HAVE
NOT BEEN HACKED.
>> Stewart: FOLLOWING THE
REPORT, SENATE DEMOCRATIC
LEADERS CALLED ON INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES TO HAND OVER ANY
INFORMATION CONCERNING RUSSIAN
CYBER ATTACKS OF ANY KIND AND
DEMANDED A BIPARTISAN
CONGRESSIONAL INQUIRY.
IN A PHONE CALL ON MSNBC'S "A.M.
JOY," SENATE DEMOCRATIC LEADER
HARRY REID CHARGED F.B.I.
DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY WITH
WITHHOLDING INFORMATION HE HAD
PRIOR TO THE ELECTION ON RUSSIAN
CYBER ATTACKS.
>> THE F.B.I. HAD THIS MATERIAL
FOR A LONG TIME.
COMEY-- WHO, YOU KNOW, IS A
REPUBLICAN-- REFUSED TO DIVULGE
THIS INFORMATION REGARDING
RUSSIA.
>> Stewart: AND IN A TWEET FROM
THE SPOKESMAN FOR THE HILLARY
CLINTON CAMPAIGN, BRIAN FALLON
WROTE:
BUT IN A STATEMENT RELEASED
YESTERDAY, PRESIDENT-ELECT
TRUMP'S TRANSITION TEAM
QUESTIONED THE CREDIBILITY OF
THE INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES,
WRITING:
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP WON JUST
UNDER 57% OF ELECTORAL COLLEGE
VOTES, WHICH RANKS 46th OUT OF
58 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS.
YESTERDAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ORDERED A FULL REVIEW OF ANY
CYBER ATTACKS AIMED AT
INFLUENCING THE U.S. ELECTION TO
BE COMPLETED BEFORE HE LEAVES
OFFICE NEXT MONTH.
JOINING US NOW FOR MORE ON THIS
STORY IS GREG MILLER OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST," PART OF THE
REPORTING TEAM THAT BROKE THE
NEWS LAST NIGHT.
GREGG, RUSSIAN CYBER SPYING ON
THE UNITED STATES IS NOT
ANYTHING NEW OR ANYTHING
UNKNOWN, BUT IT SEEMS THAT THIS
TAKES THIS TO AN UNPRECEDENTED
LEVEL.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN?
>> YOU'RE RIGHT.
RUSSIA HAS, FOR MANY, MANY
YEARS, BEEN SUSPECTED OF
AGGRESSIVE ESPIONAGE AGAINST THE
UNITED STATES IN ALL KINDS OF
AREAS.
BUT IN THIS CASE, THE THING
THAT SEPARATES THIS INSTANCE IS
WHAT RUSSIAN INTELLIGENCE
APPEARS TO HAVE DONE WITH THE
MATERIAL IT GOT, RIGHT.
SO IT'S NOT A SURPRISE THAT THEY
WENT AFTER MATERIAL LIKE THIS
ON A MAIN PARTIES IN THE UNITED
STATES' SYSTEM.
BUT THEY TOOK THIS TROVE, AND
THEY USED IT, AND AS SOME
EX-AGENCY PEOPLE HAVE SAID, THEY
WEAPONIZED IT.
THEY TURNED IT INTO A WEAPON
AGAINST THE UNITED STATES'
SYSTEM, AGAINST-- AND POSSIBLY
NOW, AGAINST A PARTICULAR
CANDIDATE.
>> Stewart: ACCORDING TO THE
C.I.A. ASSESSMENT, WHO WERE
THESE HACKERS?
WERE THEY DIRECTLY RELATED TO
THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT OR WERE
THEY INDEPENDENT ACTORS WHO THEN
GAVE IT TO WIKILEAKS AND THE
RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT WATCHED WITH
INTEREST?
>> RIGHT, SO THESE ACTORS WHO
OBTAINED THIS MATERIAL AND
DELIVERED IT TO WIKILEAKS WERE
DESCRIBED TO US AS BEING ONE
STEP REMOVED FROM RUSSIAN
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES AS KNOWN
ENTITIES, AS HAVING KNOWN
AFFILIATIONS WITH THOSE RUSSIAN
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES, BUT
NEVERTHELESS NOT NECESSARILY
PART OF THOSE SERVICES.
THERE ARE STILL SOME GAPS IN THE
UNDERSTANDING OF THEIR ROLE AND
WHAT HAPPENED HERE, RIGHT.
AS OUR STORY SAID TODAY, THERE
IS-- IT'S NOT-- U.S.
INTELLIGENCE HASN'T, YOU KNOW,
DOESN'T FOR INSTANCE, HAVE
SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS ISSUED TO
THESE ACTORS.
BUT THEY LOOK, I MEAN, I THINK
THIS IS PART OF THE EMERGING
CASE THAT THE C.I.A. AND OTHER
SPY AGENCIES ARE REALLY BUSY
ASSEMBLING, AND THEIR
IDENTIFICATION OF THESE ACTORS
IS A REALLY CRITICAL
BREAKTHROUGH.
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK ABOUT
ALL THE AGENCIES.
THE C.I.A. HAS WEIGHED IN.
THE DIRECTOR OF THE N.S.A.,
ADMIRAL ROGERS, TOLD THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL" LAST MONTH
ABOUT WIKILEAKS THAT "IT WAS A
CONSCIOUS EFFORT BY A NATION
STATE TO ATTEMPT TO ACHIEVE A
SPECIFIC EFFECT."
WHAT ABOUT THE F.B.I.?
>> WELL, THE F.B.I. IS-- IS-- IS
A LITTLE HARDER TO UNDERSTAND
WHERE THEY ARE ON THIS.
I MEAN, THERE'S BEEN LOTS OF
SPECULATION ABOUT INVESTIGATIONS
AND SURVEILLANCE EFFORTS THAT
WERE UNDER WAY DURING THE
ELECTION, BUT A LOT OF THAT
REALLY REMAINS MURKY.
DIRECTOR COMEY, NOTABLY, DID NOT
SIGN OFF-- AT LEAST PUBLICLY--
ON THE LETTER THAT THE DIRECTOR
OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND
DIRECTOR OF HOMELAND SECURITY
ISSUED IN LATE OCTOBER, ACCUSING
RUSSIA, CONFRONTING RUSSIA, WITH
THIS KIND OF INTERVENTION.
AND I THINK THAT'S PARTLY
BECAUSE THE F.B.I. IS STILL
PURSUING THIS CASE.
IT'S STILL TRYING TO ASSEMBLE A
LOT OF THIS INFORMATION AND IS
TRYING TO STAY OUT OF THE
POLITICAL FRAY THAT IS QUICKLY
ENVELOPING THIS STORY.
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THE POLITICS OF THIS.
AT ANY POINT DURING THIS TIME,
DID ANY OF THE AGENCIES OR
THE ADMINISTRATION OR ANYBODY
WITH INFORMATION ABOUT THESE
LEAKS REALIZE ALL THESE LEAKS
ARE ABOUT THE D.N.C., NOT THE
R.N.C.?
>> THAT WASN'T LOST ON
DEMOCRATIC LAWMAKERS.
IF YOU ADD UP, IF YOU STACK UP
ALL THE MATERIAL THAT HAS BEEN
RELEASED HERE, IT ENDS UP ON ONE
SIDE OF THE POLITICAL SPECTRUM.
NOW, HOW CAN YOU NOT DRAW THE
CONCLUSION THAT RUSSIA WAS
TRYING TO STEER TO A PARTICULAR
OUTCOME HERE?
AND I THINK THE INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES WERE RELUCTANT TO MAKE
THAT LEAP UNTIL THEY HAD ENOUGH
EVIDENCE TO BACK THAT UP, AND I
THINK THAT'S WHAT WE'RE STARTING
TO SEE NOW.
>> Thompson: SO WHAT COMES
NEXT IN TERMS OF THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S CALLS FOR AN
INVESTIGATION BY JANUARY 20?
>> I MEAN, TO ME-- THIS IS A
REALLY INTERESTING TIME BECAUSE
THIS SETS UP A BIG SHOWDOWN.
HERE YOU HAVE AN OUTGOING
ADMINISTRATION ASSEMBLING A--
TRYING TO ASSEMBLE A CONSENSUS
DETERMINATION ON RUSSIA'S ROLE
IN THIS PAST ELECTION, SOMETHING
THAT YOU CAN'T REALLY ARGUE
WITH, SOMETHING SO COMPELLING
THAT IT WILL OVERRIDE ALL OF THE
OPPOSITION.
AND IT'S SETTING IT UP SO IT
WILL DELIVER THIS JUST AS THIS
NEW PRESIDENT IS SWORN IN, WHO
HAS DISMISSED THIS FROM THE VERY
BEGINNING.
SO TO ME, IT'S JUST A-- A
FASCINATING SHOWDOWN THAT AWAITS
HERE.
>> Stewart: GREGG MILLER OF
THE "WASHINGTON POST," THANK YOU
SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> SURE, THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS HAS
RELEASED A NEW SURVEY ON GLOBAL
ATTITUDES ABOUT WAR THAT REVEALS
SOME DRAMATIC CHANGES DURING THE
LAST 20 YEARS.
THE RED CROSS HIRED THE GALLUP
ORGANIZATION TO QUESTION MORE
THAN 17,000 PEOPLE IN 16
COUNTRIES, HALF OF WHICH ARE IN
CONFLICT ZONES LIKE IRAQ,
AFGHANISTAN, SOUTH SUDAN, YEMEN
AND UKRAINE.
THE SURVEY, COMPLETED BETWEEN
JUNE AND SEPTEMBER, COVERED
TREATMENT OF CIVILIANS AND
SOLDIERS AND TOPICS LIKE TORTURE
AND MIGRATION.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, I SPOKE WITH
THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE
RED CROSS, YVES DACCORD, ABOUT
THEIR "PEOPLE ON WAR" SURVEY.
SIR, WHAT HAS BEEN THE BIGGEST
SHIFT IN ATTITUDES IN THE PAST
20 YEARS?
>> WHAT IS INTERESTING IS WHEN
YOU COMPARE WHAT WAS SAID BY
PEOPLE ACROSS THE WORLD IN 1999,
AND WHAT PEOPLE ARE TELLING US
TODAY, YOU SEE TWO BIG SHIFTS.
ONE IS VERY CLEARLY RELATED TO
IN FACT WHAT COULD HAPPEN TO
CIVILIANS, PEOPLE AFFECTED BY
WAR.
WHEN THEY ARE TALKING ABOUT
THAT, THEY ARE DEEPLY CONVINCED
THAT THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF
WAR APPLIES AND SHOULD APPLY,
AND THERE SHOULD BE NO
EXCEPTIONS.
SYRIANS SHOULD BE PROTECTED,
HEALTH CARE SHOULD BE PROTECTED,
HUMANITARIANS SHOULD BE
PROTECTED.
WHEREAS PEOPLE IN COUNTRIES LIKE
THE U.S., U.K., FRANCE, EVEN
CHINA AND RUSSIA, THEY ARE MAYBE
NOT AS ADAMANT AS THEY WERE
BEFORE.
SO THAT'S ONE OF THE SHIFTS.
AND THE OTHER SHIFT IS CLEARLY
RELATED TO TORTURE IN TERMS OF
MAYBE ACCEPTING THAT IN SOME
SITUATION, TORTURE IS POSSIBLE.
>> Stewart: LET'S DRILL DOWN A
LITTLE BIT ON SOME OF THOSE
SUBJECTS AND SOME OF THOSE
NUMBERS.
THE REPORT, OBVIOUSLY,
HIGHLIGHTED THE CHANGING
ATTITUDE TOWARDS CIVILIANS, BUT
IT WAS VERY DIFFERENT, FENDING
ON THE COUNTRY WHERE'S THE
QUESTION WAS ASKED.
78% OF PEOPLE IN CONFLICT ZONES
SAY ATTACKING POPULATED AREAS IS
WRONG.
BUT WHEN THAT QUESTION WAS ASKED
OF THE PERMANENT FIVE IT'S
UNITED STATES, THE U.K., FRANCE,
RUSSIA, AND CHINA-- THAT NUMBER
DROPS TO 50%.
IS THIS TREND ACROSS THE REPORT
WHERE THE P-5 HAVE A DIFFERENT
ATTITUDE VERSUS COUNTRY WHERE'S
THERE'S ACTUALLY CONFLICT?
>> YEAH, YOU CAN START TO SEE A
REAL SHIFT BETWEEN THE PUBLIC
OPINION OF THE PEOPLE DIRECTLY
AFFECTED BY WAR AND PEOPLE IN
THE P-5 SECURITY COUNCIL
COUNTRY.
AND YES, THERE ARE ELEMENTS
WHERE YOU SEE A BIT OF A
DIFFERENCE.
WHERE THERE IS CONSISTENCE,
PEOPLE THINK HEALTH CARE IS A
RIGHT THAT NEEDS TO BE GIVEN TO
EVERYBODY.
EVERYBODY WILL SAY THAT.
THEY WILL ALSO SAY CIVILIANS
NEED TO BE PROTECTED IN GENERAL.
BUT ON SPECIFICS, IT'S TRUE, YOU
CAN START TO SEE THAT MAYBE THE
POLITICAL ENVIRONMENT, MAYBE THE
PUBLIC ENVIRONMENT, ALSO WHAT
HAPPENS THE LAST 15 YEARS, MEANS
THAT PEOPLE ARE MAYBE MORE
TOLERANT IN COUNTRIES LIKE U.K.,
FRANCE, U.S., ABOUT CASUALTIES
WHEN IT COMES TO CIVILIAN IN
WAR.
>> Stewart: ONE OF THE VERY
INTERESTING QUESTIONS IN THE
REPORT WAS ABOUT THE ATTACKING
RELIGIOUS SITES AND HISTORICAL
MONUMENTS AND HOW STRONGLY
PEOPLE FELT THAT THAT WAS WRONG,
THAT THAT WAS NOT A PART OF WAR.
I WAS SURPRISED TO LEARN, I HAVE
TO SAY, THAT I DIDN'T UNDERSTAND
THAT CERTAIN MONUMENTS AND
HISTORIC SITES WERE ACTUALLY
PROTECTED UNDER THE LAWS OF WAR.
>> BECAUSE IT IS ABOUT PEOPLE,
IT IS ABOUT THE CULTURE, IT'S SO
CENTRAL TO ALL OF US.
AND IT'S VERY TRUE TO SEE THAT
PEOPLE AROUND THE WORLD, DESPITE
WHAT WE'VE SEEN-- OR MAYBE
BECAUSE OF WHAT WE'VE SEEN RIGHT
NOW IN THE MIDDLE EAST-- FEEL
VERY STRONGLY, THIS MONUMENT,
THIS CULTURE NEEDS TO BE
PROTECTED WHATSOEVER.
AND, BY THE WAY, IT'S
INTERESTING BECAUSE THEY ARE
SAYING THE SAME ABOUT HEALTH
CARE.
I'M QUITE AMAZED BECAUSE YOU SEE
AROUND THE WORLD, AT LEAST ONE
OF THE PLACES AND THINGS WE ARE
SO WORRIED ABOUT, IS TO SEE
HOSPITAL, HEALTH CARE WORKERS
CONTINUE TO BE ATTACKED.
>> Stewart: THE NUMBERS ARE
VERY CLEAR.
82% OF RESPONDENTS SAY ATTACKING
HOSPITALS, AMBULANCES, AND
HEALTH CARE WORKERS IS WRONG,
AND THAT NUMBER EVEN JUMP
HIGHER, OBVIOUSLY, IN PLACES
WHERE THERE ARE CONFLICTS.
THERE IS AN INTERESTING TWIST,
THOUGH.
THERE WAS A QUESTION ASKED ABOUT
PROVIDING HEALTH CARE TO THE
OTHER, TO THE ENEMY.
AND THEN THE NUMBERS SHIFT.
THEY GO DOWN, CORRECT?
>> THAT IS CORRECT, YES.
NOT AGAIN IN EVERY COUNTRY, BUT
IT'S VERY CLEAR WHEN PEOPLE ASK,
"YOU CAN PROVIDE HUMANITARIAN
ASSISTANCE, HEALTH CARE
ASSISTANCE TO PEOPLE AFFECTED,"
PEOPLE WILL SAY YES.
WHEN THEY START TO SAY CAN YOU
DO THAT TO YOUR ENEMY
COMBATANTS PEOPLE ARE MORE
WORRIED.
IT DEPENDS ON THE COUNTRY.
IT'S VERY INTERESTING TO LOOK AT
AFGHANISTAN FOR EXAMPLE OR SYRIA
OR YEMEN WHERE PEOPLE STRONGLY
BELIEVE THE WOUNDED, WHENEVER
THE SIDE THIS PERSON COULD BE,
NEEDS TO RECEIVE HEALTH CARE.
WHEREAS AGAIN, IN SOME COUNTRY,
PEOPLE ARE A LITTLE BIT MORE
RELUCTANT, AND MAYBE AGAIN, THIS
IS PART OF WHAT THEY SEE THROUGH
THE MEDIA, WHAT HAPPENS IN THE
PUBLIC ENVIRONMENT, THROUGH
WHICH THEY ARE MAYBE EXPOSED TO,
WHERE MAYBE YOU FEEL THE OTHER
IS-- IS SOMEBODY THAT YOU DON'T
NEED ANY MORE TO PROTECT.
AND THAT'S, I MUST SAY, THE
WORRYING TREND.
>> Stewart: THE REPORT IS VERY
CLEAR ABOUT TORTURE.
AND IT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE
THERE IS A LITTLEIT OF SHIFT
WHEN YOU DIG DOWN.
TWO-THIRD OF RESPONDENTS, 66%
SAID IT WAS WRONG, BUT A THIRD
BELIEVED CAPTURED ENEMY
COMBATANTS CAN BE TORTURED TO
OBTAIN MILITARY INFORMATION.
THE UNITED STATES' FIG OUR THIS
WAS 46% SAID THAT WAS OKAY.
IT WAS JUST A BIT HIGHER IN
ISRAEL, THE MOST IN NIGERIA.
TELL US WHAT YOU THINK ABOUT
THOSE NUMBERS AND THAT SHIFT.
>> I THINK WE HAVE ALWAYS TO
LOOK AT TWO ISSUES.
ONE, I THINK IT'S POSITIVE TO
SEE THAT OVERALL, PEOPLE STILL
FEEL TORTURE IS SOMETHING
TOTALLY WRONG, AND I THINK MORE
THAN TWO-THIRDS OF PEOPLE,
INCLUDING PEOPLE EXPOSED ON--
YOU KNOW, ON THE DAILY LIFE AT
WHAT IS HAPPENING IN WAR, STILL
FEEL TORTURE IS ABSOLUTELY
WRONG.
WHAT I FOUND INTERESTING IS--
AND THAT'S THE OTHER ISSUE--
IS WHEN YOU ASK MORE SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS, IT'S TRUE.
YOU SEE A GROWING TOLERANCE IN
SPECIFIC COUNTRY.
YOU MENTION NIGERIA, ISRAEL, BUT
ALSO THE U.S., WHEN IT COMES TO
TORTURING AN ENEMY COMBATANT TO
GET INFORMATION YOU SEE PEOPLE
ARE MORE OPEN TO THAT.
I THINK MAYBE ONE OF THE REASONS
IS BECAUSE PEOPLE FEEL ON THAT
CASE IT WILL MAYBE HELP TO SAVE
THE SECURITY OF THE COUNTRY.
THIS IS WHAT THEY'VE SEEN IN THE
MEDIA, RIGHT?
IF I LOOK AT THE LAST 10 YEARS,
SO MANY TIMES WHERE YOU TORTURE
THE ENEMY TO GET INFORMATION.
AND ON THE OTHER HAND, WE KNOW
THAT TORTURE TO GET INFORMATION
IS ABSOLUTELY NOT THE RIGHT WAY
TO GO, NOT ONLY MORALLY, NOT
ONLY LEGALLY, BUT IT DOESN'T
PROVIDE YOU WITH INFORMATION YOU
NEED BECAUSE PEOPLE WILL GIVE
YOU INFORMATION THEY HAVE JUST
TO NOT SUFFER.
BUT STILL, PEOPLE IN SOME
COUNTRIES FEEL THAT SOMEWHAT
IT'S ALLOWED.
AND I THINK MAYBE THIS IS
SOMETHING WHICH NEEDS TO BE
DISCUSSED AND NEED TO HAVE A
DEBATE ABOUT, WHY PEOPLE TODAY
THINK, AT LEAST IN CERTAIN
COUNTRIES, THAT YOU CAN TORTURE
AN ENEMY COMBATANT.
>> Stewart: I HATE TO USE THE
PHRASE "WAR FATIGUE" BUT IN
DISCUSSING THIS REPORT, READING
THIS REPORT, I WONDER IF IT IS
FATIGUE ABOUT WAR.
WE'VE HAD THESE LONG, ENDLESS
CONFLICTS THAT SEEM IMPOSSIBLE
IN SOME SITUATIONS, THAT THAT
HAS HAD AN IMPACT ON THE WAY
PEOPLE FEEL ABOUT WAR AND WHAT'S
ACCEPTABLE AND WHAT ISN'T.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
>> I THINK THERE IS MAYBE A
DIFFERENT DYNAMIC.
I THINK IT IS TRUE, PEOPLE,
ESPECIALLY WHEN WE'RE HERE IN
OUR COUNTRY, WE ARE RATHER SAFE,
RIGHT?
WE FEEL THAT SOMEWHAT THE WAR
CONTAINED FURTHER AND NOT
TOUCHING US, AND POSSIBLY, WE
ARE TIRED WITH WHAT IS HAPPENING
RIGHT NOW IN SOME OF THE
COUNTRIES THAT WE KNOW FROM A
LONG TIME-- AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ,
NOW SYRIA.
AND THE FEELING IS IT'S LASTING
AND WILL CONTINUE TO LAST.
SO I DO UNDERSTAND THAT
SOMETIMES PEOPLE FEEL, "WHY
BOTHER?"
YOU KNOW, IT'S FAR AWAY.
ON THE OTHER HAND, WHAT I FOUND
SO IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND IS
THAT THESE ISSUES WILL LESS AND
LESS BE CONTAINED THERE.
THEY ARE LESS AND LESS TAINTING
OUR OWN REALITY.
LOOK AT MIGRATION.
THE PEOPLE ARE COMING TO US ARE
FORCED TO MIGRATE BECAUSE IN
FACT THERE IS WAR.
BECAUSE IN FACT THE WAR OF LAW
IS NOT RESPECTED.
SO EVEN YOU DON'T BOTHER
SOMEWHAT WHAT IS HAPPENING THERE
HAS AN INFLUENCE OVER YOU.
SO I THINK WE WILL HAVE TO GET
OVER IT, THIS FATIGUE SOMEWHAT,
EXPND WHAT IS HAPPENING THERE IN
THE MIDDLE EAST, IN AFRICA, IN
THE AMERICAS, MAYBE IN ASIA, HAS
AN INFLUENCE ON US ALSO.
>> Stewart: YVES DACCORD OF
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF
THE RED CROSS, THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: WHAT'S NEXT FOR THE
DAKOTA ACCESS PIPELINE?
FIND OUT ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: DONALD TRUMP OFTEN
INVOKED RONALD REAGAN ON THE
CAMPAIGN TRAIL THIS YEAR, AND,
JUST LAST WEEK, AT A RALLY IN
NORTH CAROLINA, THE PRESIDENT-
ELECT USED THE SAME PHRASE USED
BY REAGAN, "PEACE THROUGH
STRENGTH," TO DESCRIBE HIS PLANS
FOR THE UNITED STATES MILITARY.
BUT JUST HOW SIMILAR THE TWO MEN
ARE IS A QUESTION, AND, AS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JEFF GREENFIELD
EXPLAINS, THEIR DIFFERENCES ARE
A TESTIMONY ABOUT HOW MUCH OUR
POLITICAL LANDSCAPE HAS CHANGED
OVER THE PAST 35 YEARS.
>> THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> Reporter: 1980: A LANDSLIDE
BY ANY MEASURE.
RONALD REAGAN DEFEATS PRESIDENT
JIMMY CARTER BY 10% POINTS IN
THE POPULAR VOTE, EIGHT AND A
HALF MILLION VOTES.
HE WINS 44 STATES, 489 ELECTORAL
VOTES AND SWEEPS A REPUBLICAN
SENATE INTO POWER ON HIS
COATTAILS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Reporter: 2016: DESPITE
RUNNING 2.7 MILLION POPULAR
VOTES BEHIND HILLARY CLINTON,
DONALD TRUMP WINS THE WHITE
HOUSE BY CARRYING 30 STATES WITH
306 ELECTORAL VOTES.
A SHIFT OF ONLY 40,000 VOTES
FROM TRUMP TO CLINTON IN THREE
OF THE CLOSEST STATES--
WISCONSIN, MICHIGAN AND
PENNSYLVANIA-- 1/30th OF 1% OF
THE NATIONAL TOTAL-- WOULD HAVE
MADE CLINTON THE WINNER.
YET IT MAY BE TRUMP RATHER THAN
REAGAN WHO PRESIDES OVER GREATER
PUBLIC POLICY CHANGE.
REAGAN CAME TO THE PRESIDENCY
WITH THE CLEAR GOAL OF SHRINKING
THE POWER OF WASHINGTON, AS HE
SAID IN HIS FIRST INAUGURAL
ADDRESS.
>> GOVERNMENT IS NOT THE
SOLUTION TO OUR PROBLEM.
GOVERNMENTISTHE PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: YET BY THE END OF
HIS TWO TERMS, NOT A SINGLE
SOCIAL PROGRAM OF LYNDON
JOHNSON'S GREAT SOCIETY HAD BEEN
ELIMINATED OR SUBSTANTIALLY
REDUCED.
NOT MEDICARE, NOT MEDICAID, NOT
HEAD START, NOT CONSUMER
PROTECTION, NOT THE CIVIL RIGHTS
ACT.
IN FACT, UNDER REAGAN, THE SIZE
OF THE FEDERAL CIVILIAN
WORKFORCE GREW.
THE FEDERAL BUDGET DEFICIT SET
PEACETIME RECORDS, AND THE
NATIONAL DEBT REACHED AN ALL-
TIME HIGH.
WHY?
ONE HUGE REASON: DIVIDED
GOVERNMENT.
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES WAS
IN DEMOCRATIC HANDS ALL EIGHT
YEARS OF HIS PRESIDENCY, THE
SENATE FOR THE LAST TWO.
REAGAN HAD TO NEGOTIATE WITH THE
OPPOSITION.
AND REAGAN DEALT WITH A VERY
DIFFERENT REPUBLICAN PARTY THAN
TODAY'S.
AT LEAST A THIRD OF SENATE
REPUBLICANS BACK THEN WERE
SQUARELY IN THE MODERATE AND
EVEN LIBERAL CAMP, AN ALL BUT
EXTINCT BREED TODAY.
THAT WAS A CHECK ON REAGAN'S
CABINET AND COURT APPOINTMENTS.
BY CONTRAST, TRUMP WILL HAVE A
CONGRESS UNDER TOTAL REPUBLICAN
CONTROL AND A PARTY MORE
CONSISTENTLY CONSERVATIVE THAN
BACK IN THE 1980s.
THAT MEANS, FOR INSTANCE, THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S KEY
LEGISLATIVE VICTORY, THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, IS LIKELY
TO BE REPEALED AND REPLACED.
BUT JUST AS IMPORTANT, A SENATE
RULE CHANGE DEMOCRATS PUT INTO
PLACE WHEN THEY HELD THE
MAJORITY THREE YEARS AGO
ABOLISHING THE FILIBUSTER FOR
MOST JUDICIAL AND PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION MEANS NOW THAT
THEY'RE IN THE MINORITY,
DEMOCRATS HAVE A LOT LESS POWER
TO BLOCK TRUMP'S CHOICES.
AND SOME OF THOSE CHOICES
ADVOCATE SWEEPING CHANGES IN
FEDERAL POLICY.
HIS CHOICE FOR ATTORNEY GENERAL,
ALABAMA SENATOR JEFF SESSIONS,
HAS LONG OPPOSED THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT'S ATTEMPTS TO BLOCK
STATE LAWS THAT IMPOSE VOTER
I.D. REQUIREMENTS.
HIS PROPOSED ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY ADMINISTRATOR,
OKLAHOMA ATTORNEY GENERAL SCOTT
PRUITT, IS A SKEPTIC OF MAN-MADE
CLIMATE CHANGE AND AN ALLY OF
THE OIL, COAL AND NATURAL GAS
INDUSTRIES.
HIS PROPOSED EDUCATION
SECRETARY, MICHIGAN ACTIVIST
BETSY DEVOS, IS A STRONG
SUPPORTER OF CHARTER SCHOOLS AND
DEEPLY CRITICAL OF TEACHERS'
UNIONS.
AND HIS CHOICE FOR HOUSING AND
URBAN DEVELOPMENT SECRETARY, DR.
BEN CARSON, HAS CALLED PUBLIC
HOUSING DESEGREGATION RULES
FAILED "MANDATED SOCIAL
ENGINEERING SCHEMES" AND LIKENED
THEM TO COMMUNISM.
TRUMP'S PICK FOR LABOR
SECRETARY, ANDREW PUZDER, IS A
FOE OF THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S EXPANSION OF
ELIGIBILITY FOR OVERTIME PAY AND
OF RAISING THE MINIMUM WAGE.
WHAT THIS MEANS IS THAT ONCE HIS
CABINET IS IN PLACE, IT COULD
REPRESENT AS CLEAR A REVERSAL OF
FEDERAL POLICIES AS ANY IN
RECENT MEMORY.
AN EVEN MORE DRAMATIC ARENA FOR
CHANGE IS THE SUPREME COURT.
IN REAGAN'S TIME, JUSTICES WOULD
OCCASIONALLY DIVERGE FROM THE
POLICIES OF THE PRESIDENT WHO
APPOINTED THEM.
FOR INSTANCE, JUSTICES SANDRA
DAY O'CONNOR AND ANTHONY KENNEDY
VOTED TO UPHOLD "ROE V. WADE,"
THE DECISION THAT HAD MADE
ABORTION A CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT,
WHICH REAGAN OPPOSED.
BUT FOR THE LAST QUARTER
CENTURY, ALMOST EVERY SUPREME
COURT NOMINEE OF EVERY PRESIDENT
HAS VOTED CONSISTENTLY ALONG
POLITICAL LINES.
CHIEF JUSTICE JOHN ROBERTS'
UPHOLDING OBAMACARE IS ONE BIG
EXCEPTION.
>> THEY WILL INTERPRET THE
CONSTITUTION THE WAY THE
FOUNDERS WANTED IT INTERPRETED,
AND I BELIEVE THAT'S VERY, VERY
IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: TRUMP PROMISED TO
PUT CONSERVATIVES ON THE HIGH
COURT, AND HE'LL START WITH THE
UNFILLED VACANCY LEFT BY THE
DEATH OF ANTONIN SCALIA.
SHOULD JUSTICE KENNEDY OR EITHER
OF THE COURT'S OLDEST LIBERALS,
RUTH BADER GINSBURG OR STEPHEN
BREYER, RETIRE, TRUMP COULD
CHANGE THE COURT FOR A
GENERATION BY CREATING A 6-3
CONSERVATIVE MAJORITY FOR THE
FIRST TIME SINCE THE 1930s.
TO BE SURE, IT'S NOT CLEAR
SAILING FOR TRUMP'S AGENDA.
A DOZEN RETURNING REPUBLICAN
SENATORS, ROUGHLY ONE IN FOUR,
REJECTED OR NEVER ENDORSED
TRUMP'S PRESIDENTIAL BID, AND
THEY MAY PUSH BACK ON SOME OF
HIS NOMINEES AND PROPOSALS.
STILL, IT'S A STRIKING MEASURE
OF WHAT HAS CHANGED THAT A
REPUBLICAN WHO WON THE TWO
BIGGEST LANDSLIDES IN HIS
PARTY'S HISTORY COULD CHANGE FAR
LESS THAN HIS RHETORIC PROMISED
WHILE A REPUBLICAN WHO EDGED
INTO OFFICE BY SO NARROW A
MARGIN HAS THE POTENTIAL TO
CHANGE SO MUCH MORE.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: THE 114th SESSION OF
CONGRESS WRAPPED UP EARLY THIS
MORNING WITH THE GOVERNMENT
AVERTING A SHUTDOWN WHEN THE
SENATE SENT A STOP-GAP SPENDING
BILL TO PRESIDENT OBAMA.
THE BILL PASSED AFTER SENATE
DEMOCRATS ENDED THEIR SHOWDOWN
WITH REPUBLICANS OVER EXPIRING
HEALTHCARE BENEFITS FOR COAL
MINERS JUST BEFORE MIDNIGHT.
DEMOCRATS HAD WANTED THOSE
BENEFITS TO LAST THROUGH ALL OF
NEXT YEAR BUT AGREED TO ONLY A
FOUR-MONTH EXTENSION.
THE SPENDING BILL PASSED 63-36.
REPORTS FROM SYRIA TODAY SAY
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS HAVE
RETAKEN PARTS OF THE ANCIENT
CITY OF PALMYRA IN A SURPRISE
ASSAULT NINE MONTHS AFTER THEY
WERE EXPELLED BY SYRIAN FORCES
AND THEIR ALLIES.
MEANWHILE, DEFENSE SECRETARY ASH
CARTER SAID TODAY THE U.S. IS
SENDING 200 MORE TROOPS TO SYRIA
TO HELP REBELS ATTACK THE SELF-
DECLARED ISIS CAPITAL OF RAQQA.
CARTER ALSO URGED U.S. ARAB
PARTNERS TO COMMIT MORE MILITARY
FORCES TO THE FIGHT AGAINST
ISIS.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
URGED RUSSIA TO ALLOW TRAPPED
CIVILIANS SAFE PASSAGE OUT OF
REBEL-HELD EAST ALEPPO.
SYRIAN AND RUSSIAN ATTACKS HAVE
HALTED EVACUATIONS AND BLOCKED
MUCH NEEDED AID DELIVERIES TO
THOUSANDS CAUGHT IN THE
CROSSFIRE.
RUSSIA CLAIMS THAT THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS NOW CAPTURED
ALMOST ALL OF THE EASTERN HALF.
THE NUMBER OF HOMELESS HAS RISEN
TO 45,000 FROM A MAGNITUDE 6.5
EARTHQUAKE THAT STRUCK THE ACEH
PROVINCE OF INDONESIA THIS WEEK
AND CLAIMED AN ESTIMATED 100
LIVES.
AS THE SEARCH FOR SURVIVORS
CONTINUES, VICTIMS HAVE BEEN
TREATED IN MAKESHIFT DISASTER
TENTS.
SEARCH DOGS ARE BEING USED TO
LOOK FOR BODIES IN THE 11,000
DESTROYED OR DAMAGED BUILDINGS.
AUSTRALIA'S GOVERNMENT SAID
TODAY IT WILL PROVIDE MORE THAN
$1 MILLION IN HUMANITARIAN AID.
IN 2004, AN EARTHQUAKE AND
SUBSEQUENT TSUNAMI IN ACEH
KILLED 226,000 PEOPLE.
>> Stewart: AND FINALLY,
TURKISH OFFICIALS SAY TWO BOMBS
EXPLODED TONIGHT OUTSIDE A
SOCCER STADIUM IN ISTANBUL
FOLLOWING A GAME.
REPORTS QUOTING POLICE SOURCES
SAY AS MANY AS 13 PEOPLE MAY
HAVE BEEN KILLED AND ABOUT 20
OTHERS WOUNDED, MANY OF THEM
POLICE OFFICERS.
A POLICE BUS APPEARED TO HAVE
BEEN THE TARGET.
WHILE THE STORY IS STILL
DEVELOPING, OFFICIALS SUSPECT
ONE OF THE EXPLOSIONS WAS A CAR
BOMB, THE OTHER A SUICIDE
BOMBER.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.